Introduction
5
For claims that arose purely in the Court of Chancery (also called equity’s 
original jurisdiction), the courts were ready to compel parties to perform obli-
gations, strip profits from wrongdoers (accounts of profits), and award reme -
dies that undid transactions (rescission) or attached remedies to property, even 
in the hands of third parties (through constructive trusts or liens). In this way, 
the remedial hierarchy was the inverse of the common law courts.
However, historically, the Court of Chancery did not generally award com-
pensation. While equitable compensation is now available for breaches of equi-
table obligations, such as breaches of fiduciary duty or breaches of confidence, 
the idea of compensating for wrongdoing has come late to this body of law.
For common law causes of action, the Court of Chancery would sometimes 
step in, but only if damages were inadequate, in which case a remedy such 
as specific performance (ie, an order compelling performance of a contract) 
or an injunction might be awarded. This was known as equity’s auxiliary 
jurisdiction.
In the end, the Court of Chancery became very slow and inefficient.12 There 
was also a problem with circuitry of actions, created by the dual courts run -
ning side by side. Suppose, for example, a claimant had a contract for the sale 
of land (which is generally specifically performable) and went to the Court of 
Chancery to gain a decree of specific performance. However, because equi -
table remedies are discretionary, the Court of Chancery declined to award 
specific performance (for example, there might be unreasonable delay on the 
claimant’s part, which prejudiced the defendant). The claimant would then 
have to go to the common law courts and start all over again, using common 
law forms of action and procedures, to seek damages.
There were some attempted fixes, including statutes allowing the common 
law courts to award injunctions, and statutes allowing the Court of Chancery 
to award damages in lieu of an injunction (Lord Cairns’ Act, dealt with in 
Chapter 7).
Ultimately, however, the fixes did not work, and in the 1870s, the English 
legislature fused the administration of the courts with the Judicature Acts. 13 
In other words, Parliament abolished the two separate court systems with dif -
ferent procedures and rules of evidence running side by side. The Judicature 
Acts allowed a single judge in the one court system to apply both the rules of 
 12 A situation famously described by the author Charles Dickens: Charles 
Dickens, ‘The Martyrs of Chancery’ (1851) 2 Household Words 251; Charles 
Dickens, ‘The Martyrs of Chancery: Second Article’ (1851) 2 Household Words 
493; Charles Dickens, Bleak House (1853).
 13 The principal among these were the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 
(36 & 37 Vict. c. 66) and the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1875 (38 & 39 Vict. 
c. 77).
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access