Private law remedies
16
that the use of market values for pecuniary loss is a stabilised measure of loss 
of happiness.43
Several scholars (discussed in greater detail below) have advanced theories 
regarding substitutionary (or substitutive) money awards for various kinds of 
civil wrong, which are said to be distinguishable from normal compensatory 
damages for pecuniary loss. While there are differences between these theo -
ries, the common core of these analyses is a distinction between compensatory 
money awards, which are said to compensate for factual and consequential 
loss caused by a civil wrong, and another type of award, which is said to be a 
substitute for the fulfilment of the wrongdoer’s primary obligation and is not 
concerned with the compensation of factual loss. Crucially, a substitutionary 
award is said to be available even if the wrong has caused no factual loss, and 
it is also said that it is not subject to the rules of remoteness and mitigation.
In the context of breach of contract, we mention the theories of three schol-
ars. Stephen Smith argues that damages reflecting the amount of cost of cure 
of a breach of contract, as opposed to diminution in value, do not compensate 
for loss suffered but constitute a form of substitute specific performance. He 
argues that cost of cure should be available for every breach of contract unless 
rectification will not be undertaken, or the cost of repair is wholly dispropor -
tionate to the value of the loss, or the claimant is seeking the award in bad 
faith.44 Robert Stevens argues that substitutionary damages represent the value 
of the infringed right to performance. Unlike Stephen Smith, he does not see 
the cost of cure as the necessary measure. Instead, he argues that the differ -
ence in value between the performance contracted for and that provided plays 
a substitutionary role.45 David Winterton argues that substitutionary damages 
substitute not for the right to performance but for performance itself. Their 
measure is generally the minimum cost of substitute performance (repair or 
replacement) whether or not the plaintiff intends to cure the breach, but where 
 43 Eric Descheemaeker, ‘Pecuniary and Non-Pecuniary Loss: A 
Reinterpretation’ (2022) 138 LQR 79.
 44 Stephen A Smith, Contract Theory  (OUP 2004) 420–23; Stephen A Smith, 
‘Substitutionary Damages’ in CEF Rickett (ed), Justifying Private Law Remedies  
(Hart 2008) 100–05 (where the theory is advanced for the loss of property or 
services in general); Stephen A Smith, Rights, Wrongs, and Injustices (OUP 2019) 
172–76.
 45 Robert Stevens, ‘Damages and the Right to Performance: A Golden Victory 
or Not?’ in Jason W Neyers, Richard Bronaugh and Stephen GA Pitel (eds), 
Exploring Contract Law  (Hart 2009) 171–74.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access