Private law remedies
6
common law and equity and ensured that the same rules of evidence and pro -
cedure applied. However, equity still prevailed over the common law.14
In Ashburner’s Principles of Equity , the effect of the Judicature Acts upon 
common law and equity was said to be that ‘the two streams of jurisdiction, 
though they run in the same channel, run side by side and do not mingle 
their waters’.15 Lord Diplock commented in United Scientific Holdings Ltd v 
Burnley Borough Council:
My Lords, by 1977 this metaphor has in my view become both mischievous and 
deceptive. …As at the confluence of the Rh ône and Saône, it may be possible for a 
short distance to discern the source from which each part of the combined stream 
came, but there comes a point at which this ceases to be possible. If Professor 
Ashburner’s fluvial metaphor is to be retained at all, the waters of the confluent 
streams of law and equity have surely mingled now.16
Nonetheless, although there has been a greater tendency to borrow from 
one body of law and apply the remedial principles to another, the separation 
between the two bodies of principles still subsists to a degree.
Because of this, and the fact that remedies awarded continue to differ, it 
remains important to know whether a particular cause of action was originally 
a common law cause of action or an equitable cause of action.​
Equity developed a number of legal concepts which may be unfamiliar to 
civilians, and common lawyers may benefit from a refresher. Primary among 
those concepts are the trust and the fiduciary duty, both of which arose in 
equity’s original jurisdiction.​
In the modern era, statutes have had an increasing influence on the develop-
ment of the law generally and upon the ability to award remedies. Consequently, 
when looking at the law, it is necessary to consider judge-made law (both com-
mon law and equity decisions) and statute (made by Parliament, but then inter-
preted by the courts).
An important part of the common law method is the case: a decision based 
on particular facts, with particular reasoning given by the judge or judges. For 
non-common lawyers, it might be startling to learn that there needs to be no 
unanimity between judges: judges can differ in their reasoning and can disa -
gree entirely on the outcome of a case. In the event of disagreement, however, 
there is generally an odd-numbered bench so that the majority of judges must 
agree on the outcome.
 14 Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 (UK) (36 & 37 Vict, c. 66) s 25(11).
 15 Walter Ashburner and Denis Browne, Ashburner’s Principles of Equity (2nd 
edn, Butterworths 1933) 18.
 16 [1978] AC 904, 924–25.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access