Introduction
11
accordingly. She is not constrained by rigid categories which may prevent jus-
tice from being done. However, there are disadvantages to this approach too. 
First, there is the certainty problem: it is difficult to predict what remedy might 
be awarded if there is a great deal of discretion, and difficult to advise. Second, 
there is the rule of law problem: different judges may exercise discretion dif -
ferently in otherwise similar cases, which means that litigants are not treated 
equally, and individual prejudices may dictate the responses to disputes.
On the other hand, the other extreme is to have a very rigid system, where 
the remedy reflects the right, and there is very little discretion. This is called 
‘monism’ and reflects the traditional English approach. This has the advantage 
of certainty, but the lack of flexibility may give rise to injustice, just as with the 
old common law pleading system.
The ideal is to have what David Wright has called a ‘sticky’ relationship 
between right and remedy.30 In other words, it is reasonably predictable what 
the default remedy for a breach of contract will be at common law (expectation 
damages), but if damages are not appropriate, there is a structured discretion 
whereby other remedies can be awarded, according to identified criteria. This 
is the preferred approach of the authors.
There remains a question of how we organise and discuss remedies. As 
noted at the outset of this chapter, common law remedies (in the broad sense) 
are inflected by their historical background, and whether they emanate from 
the common law or equitable courts. However, some English scholars have 
questioned whether the common law and equitable divide should continue to 
dictate the responses to grievances.
The primary challenge to the historical view of remedies has been the 
scholarship regarding unjust enrichment. Peter Birks sought to reformulate 
and understand common law remedies in a way which reflected Roman law 
principles. Birks was a ‘monist’, as his analysis of common law remedies was 
predicated on the view that certain causative events triggered a particular rem-
edy. Hence, he said, ‘[t]he secondary obligation to pay compensatory damages 
is … the same thing as the right, looked at from the other end’.31
However, Birks thought that the traditional common law way of categoris -
ing remedies by historical causes of action (eg, according to ‘contract’, ‘tort’, 
etc.) was incorrect. He and other scholars sought to devise a taxonomy of 
 30 David Wright, Remedies (2nd edn, Federation Press 2014) 8–9; David 
Wright, ‘Wrong and Remedy: A Sticky Relationship’ [2001] Sing J Leg Stud 1.
 31 Peter Birks, ‘Definition and Division: A Meditation on Institutes 3.13’ in 
Peter Birks (ed), The Classification of Obligations  (Clarendon 1997) 24.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access