Private law remedies
14
it is pragmatic and reflects the way in which the law operates in practice. 
Compensatory damages are a default award for common law actions, so we 
consider them first. If damages are inadequate, the court may compel per -
formance, which is why remedies that compel are considered directly after 
compensation. We then move to the more unusual vindicatory remedies, which 
seek to recognise the importance of certain rights. Next, we consider remedies 
that seek to deter, such as the account of profits, which is only exceptionally 
available at common law. The equitable hierarchical structure is the inverse of 
this, but it is helpful with a practical book to present the areas of law in a way 
that maps practice to a degree and gives a clear shape to the law.
In what follows, the functional structure of this book is discussed, along 
with some theoretical approaches which may be relevant to the remedy or area 
in question. We have not been able to divide remedies perfectly between these 
categories. Lord Cairns’ Act damages present particular difficulties, as they 
have been argued to perform multiple functions (including compensation and 
prevention of unjust enrichment). They can also be seen as a monetarised ver-
sion of specific relief and are therefore placed with specific performance and 
injunctions in this book.
One remedy which we discuss in the book does not fit neatly within a func-
tional scheme. Proprietary remedies fulfil more than one function, and there 
is no general rule for when they will be awarded, so they are considered in a 
separate chapter, Chapter 11.
Chapters 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6: Compensation for Loss
Chapters 2 and 3 consider the general principles of remedies that seek to com-
pensate for loss. It is necessary to consider compensation at the outset because 
of its prevalence and importance in private law. Often, a claimant’s central 
concern is that they have lost something because of the defendant’s breach. 
Chapter 2 explores general rules governing the assessment of compensation 
that are not unique to one cause of action, and which are common at least for 
common law causes of action. Chapter 3 explores the general rules governing 
the attribution of responsibility, which are common, at least, to all common 
law causes of action. Chapters 4, 5, and 6 explore the specific rules for breach 
of contract, tort, and equitable obligations, respectively.
On a theoretical basis, some scholars, such as Ernest Weinrib, argue that 
the only legitimate situation in which a court can intervene in a private law 
dispute is when there has been a gain on the part of one person and a loss at 
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access