Private law remedies
2
to focus on the remedy they wanted for their clients, and work backward to fit 
the facts of a given case within the form of action. 4 Hence, Diplock LJ went 
on to observe that ‘a cause of action is simply a factual situation the existence 
of which entitles one person to obtain from the court a remedy against another 
p er son’.5 If the claimant could not fit their case into any of the forms of action, 
then they were not entitled to any remedy.6 Thus, it is sometimes said, ubi jus, 
ibi remedium (‘where there is a right there is a remedy’). The inflexibility of 
the forms of action helps to explain why a parallel court system developed 
alongside the Royal Courts, namely, the Court of Chancery.
Even now, Tettenborn has observed that, for a common lawyer, ‘we must 
always remember that legal advice is, at bottom, simply advice as to the rem -
edy likely to be available (or unavailable) to the client’.7
It is pivotal to understand the history of common law before one can really 
understand remedies granted in the English common law system; hence, the 
history will be discussed first. Those aware of the history can skip to the dis -
cussion of the nature of a remedy.
HISTORY
English law has developed organically, in a non-linear fashion.
The term ‘common law’ has two meanings. One meaning is general: com -
mon law means a system of law derived from the English system which relies 
on judicial decision making and case-by-case analysis, rather than a Code. A 
common law system has been exported to many former colonies of the British 
Empire. The other meaning is specific: common law means that body of law 
which was originally derived from England’s medieval Royal Courts, to be 
contrasted with the body of law derived from the Court of Chancery (known 
as ‘equity’).
The origins of the common law can be traced back to the great harmoni -
sation of the Royal Courts which took place during the reign of Henry II of 
 4 Even in the thirteenth century, Henry de Bracton, a jurist and commentator, 
noted ‘Non potest quis sine brevi agere ’ (‘no one can sue without a writ’): Henry 
de Bracton, On the Laws and Customs of England [‘De legibus et consuetudinibus 
Angliæ’], transl. SE Thorne, 4 vols (Harvard University Press, 1968–1977) f 413b.
 5 Letang v Cooper [1965] 1 QB 232, 242–43.
 6 Frederick W Maitland, The Forms of Action at Common Law: A Course of 
Lectures (CUP 1958) 5.
 7 Andrew Tettenborn, ‘Remedies: A Neglected Contribution’ [1999] Denning 
LJ 41, 41.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access