Private law remedies
22
conduct of other potential defendants (general deterrence) and responds to 
those possibilities. By stripping the defendant of his gain (or part of his gain), 
the defendant (and other potential wrongdoers) will be deterred from engaging 
in similar conduct in the future. Deterrence and efficient encouragement of 
adherence to the law appeals to law-and-economics scholars.
Chapter 10: Restitution and Giving Back
Chapter 10 considers personal remedies for unjust enrichment. It also consid -
ers the defences to a claim for restitutionary remedies, and the overlap between 
unjust enrichment law and contract law.
These remedies have at their heart the rationale of prevention of unjust 
enrichment. Unjust enrichment has come to prominence in recent years with 
a blossoming of restitutionary scholars in England and Wales. These schol -
ars have identified the action for unjust enrichment as an important cause of 
action in private law concealed by notions such as ‘quasi-contract’. They see 
its proper recognition as reshaping private law generally.
It can be difficult to distinguish between the cause of action and the remedy. 
Chapter 10 briefly examines the nature of the restitutionary causes of action in 
order to explain the remedies available.
Chapter 10 also considers rescission of contracts and other transfers, includ-
ing common law and equitable rescission, the requirement of restitutio in 
integrum, election, partial rescission, bars to rescission and the possible pro -
prietary consequences of rescission.
Rescission follows unjust enrichment because there is a kinship between 
unjust enrichment and the way in which rescission operates to unwind trans -
fers, particularly given the presence of vitiating factors. An understanding 
of unjust enrichment informs an understanding of rescission, because both 
involve vitiating factors leading to the reversal of transactions. Even though 
rescission is placed under the broader rationale of restitution and giving back, 
some aspects of rescission (particularly common law rescission) arguably have 
a self-help aspect.
Chapter 11: Proprietary Remedies
Chapter 11 considers proprietary remedies. There are several forms of propri -
etary remedy (the constructive trust, the proprietary power, and the lien), but 
courts have not traditionally exercised the choice between these remedies in a 
principled manner.
We consider proprietary remedies in the contexts of equitable wrongdoing, 
perfection, unconscionability, unjust enrichment and rescission, linking rescis-
sion to the discussion in Chapter 10.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access