Private law remedies
12
the common law causes of action, based on Roman law (which had catego -
ries based on delict, contract, quasi-contract, and quasi-delict in the time of 
Justinian).32
Birks argued that there were also four categories in the common law, namely:
 1. wrongs;
 2. consent;
 3. unjust enrichment; and
 4. ‘other’.
He placed tort and equitable wrongs (such as breach of trust or breach of fidu-
ciary duty) in the category of ‘wrongs’, arguing that the remedy was triggered 
in each instance by wrongdoing. He placed contract and express trusts (trusts 
created by the agreement of parties) in the category of ‘consent’ and argued 
that the remedy was triggered by the consent of the parties. Unjust enrich -
ment had not historically been recognised as a coherent form of action in the 
common law, and hence Birks’ elevation of it to stand alongside wrongs and 
contract was controversial. Importantly, this taxonomy cuts across the histori-
cal distinctions between common law and equity discussed at the outset of this 
chapter and encourages us to de-emphasise the historical differences.
Birks argued that ‘like cases should be treated alike’. He encouraged courts 
and scholars to analogise wrongs in tort and equity because they had the same 
‘trigger’ (namely, wrongdoing). For example, if exemplary damages are avail-
able in tort, it follows that exemplary damages should also be available for 
equitable wrongdoing because the two have the same trigger (wrongdoing). 
Similarly, Birks emphasised the similarity of contract and the express trust, on 
the basis that both arise by consent. Therefore, given that an account of profits 
(a gain-based award) is available for breach of trust, it should also be available 
for breach of contract because each arises by consent. Andrew Burrows, now a 
judge on the United Kingdom Supreme Court, has argued for a greater coher -
ence between common law and equitable remedies using a Birksian schema.33
We make particular mention of Birks’s analysis because it has proved influ-
ential, particularly in England and Wales. It has been less influential in some 
other parts of the common law world, such as Australia.
 32 Paul J du Plessis, Borkowski’s Textbook on Roman Law (6th edn, OUP 2020) 
[9.1.2.3] 256 –57.
 33 Andrew Burrows, ‘We Do This at Common Law but That in Equity’ (2002) 
22 OJLS 1.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access