Private law remedies
4
The presence of two different sets of decision-makers operating according 
to different rules led to complexity and conflict at times. In the early seven -
teenth century, it was decided that equity would always prevail over common 
law.11 This remains the case today. However, the Court of Chancery was reluc-
tant to trespass too much on the territory of the Royal Courts and only tended 
to intervene to change a common law remedial decision where common law 
rules were unable to effect an ‘adequate’ remedy.
Hence, there are in fact two historical bases for the present common law in 
a wide sense (namely, judge-made law): the common law in a narrow sense 
(which derives from the law that the Royal Courts used to apply); and equity 
(which derives from the law that the Courts of Chancery used to apply). The 
shadows of this historical division can still be seen in the law today, particu -
larly in the area of remedies.
By the seventeenth century, at common law, for causes of action in tort and 
the collection of causes of action which later became modern contract, com -
pensatory damages were usually the presumptive remedy. This remains, by 
and large, the rule today. For tort and contract, it is still presumed (to a lesser or 
greater degree) that the remedial response is compensatory damages, and any 
other remedy is exceptional. However, as we will see, in some situations, spe-
cific relief (ie, specific performance or an injunction) will be readily granted, 
particularly in relation to interests in real (or immovable) property.
Historically, tort (the law of civil wrongs) and the law of criminal wrongs 
were also intertwined. Even now, some common law torts have criminal equiv-
alents (eg, criminal assault versus tortious assault). Until the eighteenth cen -
tury, the victim of a criminal offence privately prosecuted the wrongdoer; in 
modern times, on the other hand, it has been the state which has prosecuted 
the wrongdoer for such offences. The historical lack of separation between tort 
and criminal law has given rise to some oddities. In tort, a claimant can seek 
exemplary damages (called ‘punitive damages’ in the United States) which 
seek to punish the defendant for the wrong committed. The extent to which 
such damages should be available outside tort (or even, outside a narrowly 
defined set of circumstances within tort) remains controversial.
Conversely, the Courts of Chancery typically dealt with every remedy 
except compensation. The Court of Chancery was also more discretionary 
than the common law courts (reflecting the conscience-based approach) and 
had its own rules of evidence, procedure, and terminology. For example, a 
‘defence’ in common law is called a ‘bar to relief’ in equity, and the bars to 
relief are typically highly discretionary.
 11 Earl of Oxford’s Case (1615) 1 Ch Rep 1, (1615) 21 ER 485.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access