1
1. Introduction to Private Law Remedies
 1 The decisions of superior courts in other common law countries such as 
Australia, New Zealand and Canada are not binding upon the United Kingdom 
courts but may be persuasive.
 2 Letang v Cooper [1965] 1 QB 232, 243.
 3 Frederick W Maitland, The Forms of Action at Common Law: A Course of 
Lectures (CUP 1958) 1–5.
INTRODUCTION TO REMEDIES LAW
This chapter outlines key concepts, including the history of remedies law, what 
a remedy is, how remedies work, what the theoretical debates are, and what the 
functions of remedies in private law are.
While the focus of this book will be on the common law of England, we 
will, at times, also refer to the law in other common law jurisdictions to illus -
trate our discussion.1
It is important for civilian readers to note that the common law legal system 
is not a system that has arisen by design; it has no overarching Code. Rather, 
it is a system that has evolved, over a long period of time: from its origins in 
twelfth-century medieval England to the present day. It has been adopted in 
many Commonwealth and former Commonwealth jurisdictions, including the 
United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, and Singapore. 
Consequently, there is no consistent direction to the law, and the system has 
evolved to fit different circumstances, times, and places. Moreover, histori -
cally, different courts have dealt with different matters and remedies. The long 
shadows cast by this history can still be seen in the law today.
In Letang v Cooper, Diplock LJ noted that, historically, in English law, rem-
edies were often considered before any analysis of primary rights and obliga -
tions because of the way in which common law court procedure focused on 
the causes of action.2 As long as a claimant could make out a particular ‘form 
of action’, they could then obtain a remedy. The English Kings established the 
Royal Courts to apply the common law and operated according to a system of 
writs which stipulated particular processes for particular causes of action, and 
particular remedial consequences flowed from that choice. 3 This led lawyers