Introduction
19
common law causes of action such as tort and contract, typically, specific relief 
(namely, specific performance of a contract or an injunction) is awarded only 
where compensatory damages are inadequate; hence, it makes logical sense 
to consider this category of remedy after considering compensatory damages.
Chapter 7 also considers monetary awards made in lieu of an injunction pur-
suant to Lord Cairns’ Act as they represent a monetised form of specific relief.
Compelling a defendant to do what they ought to do (or to desist from doing 
what they ought not to do) is the ultimate vindication of the claimant’s primary 
right. Some rights-based scholars, such as Robert Stevens, argue that tort law 
can generally be understood as a vindication of the claimant’s rights infringed 
by the defendant, rather than as compensation for foreseeable loss. 56 Other 
rights-based scholars have extended this theory to other areas of law.57
It is useful to consider the extent to which private law operates as a mecha -
nism for vindicating the claimant’s rights. Courts are often concerned to award 
the ‘next-best’ remedy to the primary right itself; however, they balance this 
against other considerations. For example, even though compensatory dam -
ages for breach of contract represent a less perfect remedy for a failure to 
perform than specific relief, they are the preferred remedy (as long as they 
provide an adequate substitute for performance) because they are less intrusive 
to the defendant.
Similarly, Lord Cairns’ Act damages are sometimes awarded in lieu of an 
injunction or specific performance precisely because it is not appropriate to 
compel the defendant to do a particular thing, but it is still appropriate that the 
claimant receive some monetary sum in lieu of the specific relief. However, 
Lord Cairns’ Act damages also have other functions which make them dif -
ficult to categorise. They are placed in this section simply because of their 
kinship with specific relief more generally.
Chapter 8: Vindicatory Remedies
Chapter 8 considers remedies with a vindicatory function, such as ‘reasonable 
fee’ awards, self-help remedies, exemplary damages, aggravated damages, 
apologies, declarations, and nominal damages.
Vindication of rights (in a broad sense) is the overarching aim of all private 
remedies if we take vindication to mean a making good of, and recognition of, 
the claimant’s rights.58 For a claimant’s rights to be recognised, they must have 
an adequate remedy. For example, in Ashby v White, Holt CJ said:
 56 Robert Stevens, Torts and Rights (OUP 2007).
 57 See, eg, Ben McFarlane, The Structure of Property Law  (Hart 2008).
 58 Stephen Smith has argued that this is the only function of damages awards: 
Stephen A Smith, ‘Duties, Liabilities and Damages’ (2012) 125 Harv L Rev 1727, 
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access