Introduction
3
England (1154–1189).8 Prior to this, manorial lords had enforced their own 
justice in their own manorial courts according to local custom. Henry II cre -
ated Royal Courts and ordered them to amalgamate all the regional traditions 
and apply a ‘common law’ (with any regional idiosyncrasies in custom to be 
ignored). This law continued to develop on a case-by-case basis. As noted 
above, the forms of action were all-important: the facts had to be fitted into the 
relevant forms in order for a claimant to achieve a remedy. The clerks respon-
sible for drafting the forms of action would allow some innovations, meaning 
that more and more forms of action developed. However, often claimants were 
hamstrung by the oddities of the forms of action, having to utilise ‘legal fic -
tions’ to ensure that their claims fitted within the forms.9
There were significant issues with the formulaic nature of the writs of the 
Royal Courts, and consequently, parties appealed to the ultimate authority, the 
Monarch, for unfair and rigid decisions to be overturned. Gradually, the King 
(or Queen) began to hand these decisions off to his or her Lord Chancellor, 
a churchman trained in canon law (ecclesiastical law governing Christian 
Churches). The Lord Chancellor was responsible for the Chancery, an admin-
istrative office staffed by clerks who produced and recorded official documen-
tation such as Royal Charters. The religious background and training of the 
Chancellors meant that they tended to act according to conscience.
The result was that an entirely parallel court system, the Court of Chancery, 
with its own separate rules and procedures, developed alongside the Royal 
Courts. Among other things, it was inquisitorial, not adversarial. At first, the 
Court of Chancery only stepped in to remediate any unfairness of the common 
law forms of action; however, it later came to develop its own body of law. This 
is not without precedent. It may help any readers trained in Roman law to think 
of the equitable law of the Court of Chancery as equivalent to the Praetorian 
Edict (ius honorarium), the more flexible discretionary body of praetorian law 
which developed to mitigate the inflexibility of the civil law (ius civile).10
 8 John Baker, An Introduction to English Legal History  (5th edn, OUP 2019) 
16–35.
 9 For example, the nascent common law of contract was stifled by the limita -
tions placed on the praecipe writ of covenant, which allowed for the enforcement 
of contractual-style promises. In the fourteenth century, the Royal Courts held 
that it was necessary to have a deed under seal for the praecipe writ of covenant to 
apply. Because most commercial bargains did not fulfil this requirement, the writ 
was not used to enforce bargains. Instead, the Royal Courts had to use debt (with 
penal bonds and performance bonds) and the writ of assumpsit (originally a writ 
dealing with trespass) to enforce contractual-style promises. 
 10 Paul du Plessis, Borkowski’s Textbook on Roman Law (6th edn, OUP 2020) 
[2.2.2.4] 35.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access