Private law remedies
8
recognised by the law. 20 Austin proposed that primary rights serve the pur -
poses of the law and do not arise from wrongdoing or violation of other rights. 
Secondary rights, on the other hand, arise from wrongdoing or violation of 
other rights and are conferred to protect and enforce the primary right; they 
presume that obedience to the law is not perfect because otherwise there would 
be no violations of the law. On this view, remedies are simply a response to 
wrongdoing or violation of rights.
As Austin notes, remedies give ‘teeth to the obligations imposed by law: “I 
have no right, independently of the injunction or prohibition which declares 
that some given act, forbearance or omission, would be a violation of my right; 
nor would the act or forbearance be a violation of my right, unless my right 
and the corresponding duty were clothed with a sanction, criminal or civil.”’21 
Thus, he argues, in this sense there is truth in the maxim ubi jus ibi remedium 
mentioned earlier (‘when there is a right there is a remedy’).
Lord Diplock accepted an Austinian view of contract damages in Photo 
Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd:
Every failure to perform a primary obligation is a breach of contract. The second -
ary obligation on the part of the contract breaker to which it gives rise by implica -
tion of the common law is to pay monetary compensation to the other party for the 
 20 John Austin, ‘Lecture XLV’ in Robert Campbell and John Murray (eds), 
Lectures in Jurisprudence, Or the Philosophy of Positive Law  (Vol 2, 1885) 760.
 21 ibid 794–95. 
Table 1.2   A table outlining the elements of the trust and the fiduciary 
duty
The trust The fiduciary duty
A trustee holds legal title to 
property for the benefit of the 
beneficiary who (traditionally) 
holds equitable title.
​
A fiduciary owes duties not to conflict and not to 
profit to the beneficiary:
• Inner circle: trustee-beneficiary, agent-principal, 
testator-beneficiary, employee-employer, partner-
partner etc.
• Fact based fiduciary obligations can arise if one 
party makes an undertaking to another.
​
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access