Private law remedies
10
Although most of the remedies discussed in this book fit within Zakrzewski’s 
definition, some ‘remedies’ are perhaps better conceived of as ‘permission’ by 
the court for claimants to respond to wrongs in certain ways (‘self-help reme -
dies’) or as procedural mechanisms (interlocutory injunctions, freezing orders, 
and other similar remedies).
Stephen Smith argues that we must distinguish between substantive rights 
and remedial rights.27 Remedial rights are a response to, or a consequence of, 
a ruling by a court on a question of substantive rights. Smith identifies three 
categories of remedial rights, each of which flows from the preceding right:28
 1. Action-rights: respond to the successful establishment of a cause of action.
 2. Court-ordered rights: created by order of a judge in response to an 
action-right.
 3. Enforcement-rights: the means by which a court or government body 
ensures that the court-ordered rights are enforced or complied with.
Under this analysis, post-judgment remedies would be a species of ‘enforce -
ment right’.
Ultimately, we can conclude that a remedy in the legal sense is a court order 
seeking to redress or respond to a claimant’s grievance, where the grievance 
often involves the infringement of a primary right. However, as we have seen, 
it is difficult to separate the primary right, the secondary right, and the proce -
dural rights necessary for the enforcement of the secondary rights.
The Relationship Between the Right and the Remedy
If the remedy responds to the infringement of a right, and in some sense is a 
reflection of the primary right, there is a question as to whether the remedy 
must mirror the right, and to what extent it must do so.
There are two extremes in this debate. On the one hand, a court could con -
sider the array of available remedies and pick whichever remedy the judge 
thought was most appropriate to ensure justice, on a discretionary basis. This 
is called a ‘dualist’ view.29 The advantage of this approach is that the judge has 
flexibility in the way she responds to the grievance and can tailor the remedy 
(2011) 64 CLP 51; Stephen A Smith, ‘Duties, Liabilities and Damages’ (2012) 125 
Harv L Rev 1727.
 27 Stephen A Smith, Rights, Wrongs, and Injustices (OUP 2019) 77–80.
 28 ibid 80–87. 
 29 See, eg, Grant Hammond, ‘Rethinking Remedies: The Changing Nature of 
the Conception of the Relationship between Legal and Equitable Remedies’ in 
Jeffrey Berryman (ed), Remedies: Issues and Perspectives (Carswell 1991) ch 4.
Katy Barnett and Sirko Harder - 9781035316021
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/08/2025 03:30:33AM
via free access